{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times Bold;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f3\froman\fcharset0 Times;}{\f4\froman\fcharset0 Times Roman;}}{\colortbl\red0\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;}{\stylesheet {\style\s0 \ql\fi0\li0\ri0\f2\fs24\cf0 Normal;}{\style\s3 \ql\fi0\li0\ri0\f2\fs26\b\cf0 heading 3;}{\style\s2 \ql\fi0\li0\ri0\f2\fs28\b\i\cf0 heading 2;}{\style\s1 \ql\fi0\li0\ri0\f2\fs32\b\cf0 heading 1;}}{\*\listtable}{\*\listoverridetable}{\*\generator iText 2.1.7 by 1T3XT}{\info{\author Dimitri dimitri.brosens@inbo.be}{\creationdate \yr2017\mo02\dy20\hr15\min05\sec12}{\title MODIRISK:RBINS Diptera: Culidae Collection}{\keywords Occurrence, Specimen, Culicidae, vector disease, mosquito, malaria, Eco-climatic changes, Culicidae, taxonomy, spatial distribution models, population genetics, ecology of invasive species}}\paperw11907\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\margt1440\margb1440\pgwsxn11907\pghsxn16840\marglsxn1440\margrsxn1440\margtsxn1440\margbsxn1440\pard\plain\s0\qc\fi0\li0\ri0\plain\f3\fs28\b\cf0 MODIRISK:RBINS Diptera: Culidae Collection\b0\par\f0 \par \pard\plain\s0\qc\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 Wouter \f3\fs24\cf0 Wouter Dekoninck\f3\fs24\cf0\super 1\nosupersub\f3\fs24\cf0 , \f3\fs24\cf0 Veerle \f3\fs24\cf0 Versteirt\f3\fs24\cf0\super 2\nosupersub\f3\fs24\cf0 , \f3\fs24\cf0 Dimitri \f3\fs24\cf0 dimitri.brosens@inbo.be\f3\fs24\cf0\super 3\nosupersub\par\f0 \par \pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 1 \f3\fs24\cf0 RBINS, \f3\fs24\cf0 Brussels\f3\fs24\cf0 , Belgium\f3\fs24\cf0 ; \f3\fs24\cf0 2 \f3\fs24\cf0 Avia-GIS, \f3\fs24\cf0 , Belgium\f3\fs24\cf0 ; \f3\fs24\cf0 3 \f3\fs24\cf0 Belgian Biodiversity Platform, \f3\fs24\cf0 Brussels\f3\fs24\cf0 , Belgium\par\f0 \par \pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Corresponding author(s): \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Wouter \f3\fs24\cf0 Wouter Dekoninck\f3\fs24\cf0 Veerle \f3\fs24\cf0 Versteirt\f3\fs24\cf0 , \f3\fs24\cf0 Dimitri \f3\fs24\cf0 dimitri.brosens@inbo.be\f3\fs24\cf0  (dimitri.brosens@inbo.be)\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 Received \f3\fs24\cf2 \{date\}\f3\fs24\cf0 ; Revised \f3\fs24\cf2 \{date\}\f3\fs24\cf0 ; Accepted \f3\fs24\cf2 \{date\}\f3\fs24\cf0 ; Published \f3\fs24\cf2 \{date\}\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Citation: \b0\f3\fs24\cf2 Combination of authors, year of data paper publication (in parentheses), Title, Journal Name, Volume, Issue number (in parentheses), and doi of the data paper.\f3\fs24\cf2 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Resource Citation\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Versteirt V., De Clercq E., Dekoninck W., Damiens D., Ayrinhac A., Jacobs F. & Van Bortel W. "Mosquito vectors of disease: spatial biodiversity, drivers of change, and risk". Final Report. Brussels : Belgian Science Policy 2009 \u8211?152 p. (Research Programme Science for a Sustainable Development)\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Abstract\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 MODIRISK aims at studying biodiversity of mosquitoes and monitoring/predicting its changes, and hence actively prepares to address issues on the impact of biodiversity change with particular reference to invasive species and the risk to introduce new pathogens. This is essential in the perspective of the ongoing global changes creating suitable conditions for the spread of invasive species and the (re)emergence of vector-borne diseases in Europe. The main strengths of the Modirisk project in the context of sustainable development are the link between biodiversity and health-environment, and its contribution to the development of tools to better describe the spatial distribution of mosquito biodiversity. MODIRISK addresses key topics of the global initiative Diversitas, which was one of the main drivers of the 'Research programme Science for a Sustainable Development' www.belspo.be (SSD).\par \par This Modirisk dataset contains the historic and recent Culicidae specimens as preserved in the Collections of the Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Keywords: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Occurrence, Specimen, Culicidae, vector disease, mosquito, malaria, Eco-climatic changes, Culicidae, taxonomy, spatial distribution models, population genetics, ecology of invasive species\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 General description\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Purpose: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Mosquito-borne diseases are prime candidates as (re)emergencing vector-borne disease in Europe. Knowledge of the taxonomic and functional biodiversity of both endemic and invading mosquito species as well as the factors driving change is missing in Belgium. Acquiring this knowledge is an essential step towards understanding current risk and preparing for future threats. Therefore the objectives of MODIRISK are (1) to inventorize endemic and invading mosquito species in Belgium considering environmental and taxonomic elements of biodiversity, (2) to assess the population dynamics of selected endemic and invasive mosquito species and their interrelationship (3) to model\par mosquito biodiversity distribution at a 1km resolution, and (4) to disseminate project outputs. \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Additional information: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 This dataset is linked with 2 other mosquito related datasets. One datset used for longitudinal study and the historical dataset from RBINS.(http://www.gbif.org/dataset/6679952f-649b-4888-bd97-00daca4b8cc1) & (to be completed)\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Project details\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Project title: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Mosquito vectors of disease: spatial biodiversity, drivers of change, and risk\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Personnel: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Wouter Wouter Dekoninck\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Funding: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Belspo, Science for Sustainable Development- Project SD/BD/04D (http://www.belspo.be/belspo/ssd/science/pr_biodiversity_en.stm)\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Study area descriptions/descriptor: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Project fiche: http://www.belspo.be/belspo/ssd/science/projects/MODIRISK_en.pdf\par Project report:http://www.belspo.be/belspo/ssd/science/Reports/FinalReport_MODIRISK%20ML.pdf\par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Design description: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 At the Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences (RBINS) about 1400 mosquito-specimens from the Belgian collection of the Entomology Department were screened and if needed, added to the collection. All these and previous Belgian records were added to a newly established database CULIBEL. This database will be integrated into the Belgian Biodiversity Platform and will be kept updated by RBINS. Both RBINS and MODIRISK collections were used to compare recent and old data distributions (UTM 10x10km squares). A trend criterion was made of well surveyed grid cells and a decline of diversity near larger cities could be observed. An increase of distribution area was observed for several potential mosquito vectors having the capacity to use artificial containers as breeding sites. For 23 species there is a relative change in distribution area in 56 (10x10km) grid cells.\par A molecular archive was constructed of all collected species based on the DNA barcoding region at the ITMA. Moreover, a larval molecular identification assay was developed to rapidly detect and identify possible invasive species.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Taxonomic coverage\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 General taxonomic coverage description: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Morphological identification of the Culicidae was done mainly using the electronic identification key of Schaffner et al. (2001) and the paper key of Becker et al. (2003). Data were stored into the web based data base as described above.\par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Taxonomic ranks\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Class: \f3\fs24\cf0 Insecta\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Order: \f3\fs24\cf0 Diptera\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Family: \f3\fs24\cf0 Culicidae\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Spatial coverage\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 General spatial coverage: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Belgium\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Coordinates: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 49\u176?25'30.96''N\f3\fs24\cf0  and \f3\fs24\cf0 51\u176?33'48.28''N\f3\fs24\cf0  Latitude; \f3\fs24\cf0 2\u176?15'47.46''E\f3\fs24\cf0  and \f3\fs24\cf0 6\u176?39'27.77''E\f3\fs24\cf0  Longitude \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Temporal coverage: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 1878\f3\fs24\cf0  - \f3\fs24\cf0 2007\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Natural collections description\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Parent collection identifier: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 RBINS-Entomology Collection\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Collection name: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Coll. M. Bequaert\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Natural collections description\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Parent collection identifier: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 RBINS-Entomology Collection\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Collection name: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Coll. M. Goetghebuer\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Natural collections description\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Parent collection identifier: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 RBINS-Entomology Collection\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Collection name: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 RBINS Insect Collection\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Specimen preservation method: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Pinned\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Methods\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Method step description: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 1. Fieldwork\par 2. Validation\par 3. Analyse\par 4. Publication\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Study extent description: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Specimen collections in the RBINS Diptera collection.\par \par The importance of museum collections to basic invertebrate inventories\par \par In the beginning of past century many mosquitoes were collected all over Belgium by dipterologists as M. Goetghebuer and M. Bequaert who both built up the most representative and rich collections of Belgian Diptera, preserved at RBINS (Grootaert et al., 1991). In the Belgian Culicidae collection of RBINS four subcollections are present: a general collection, two subcollections (Goetghebeur and Becquart), and a subcollection of unidentified specimens i.e. the supplements. The subcollection Bequaert was mainly collected between 1912-1958 and counts 135 voucher specimens. The subcollection Goetghebuer was collected between 1909-1946 (mainly between the period 1910-1930) and counts 269\par specimens. In the general collection 241 specimens are present all of them collected between 1878-1967 (mainly between 1880-1925). The supplements are the largest subcollection with 737 specimens collected between 1892-2005 (mainly during 1920-1960).\par \par The most recent checklist of the Belgian Culicidae counted 24 species, which was the number of identified species found in RBINS collection and additional species mentioned in the card-indexes of RBINS (Gosseries and Goddeeris 1991). The latter authors suggested at\par that time that the real number of species to be expected to occur in Belgium being approximately 50. However since 1991 only a few mosquito species were added to the Belgian fauna; Culex hortensis (Versteirt et al. 2009) and Culiseta ochroptera (Schaffner pers. com.). All 1381 specimens (24 species) in RBINS collections were reidentified and digitised. Most of the specimens (77%) were collected between 1910 and 1960 (Figure 8). Most specimens were collected between 1940 and 1950. The intensity of research and mosquito-sampling fluctuated during this period, as revealed by the number of voucher specimens per decade (Figure 8). The oldest specimens (collected in 1878) are deposit in\par the general collection. In this collection 16 species were discovered, in the subcollection Bequaert, the subcollection Goetghebuer and in the supplements respectively 18 species, 21 species and 20 species were counted.\par \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Sampling description: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 At the Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences (RBINS) about 1400 mosquito-specimens from the Belgian collection of the Entomology Department were screened and if needed, added to the collection. All these and previous Belgian records were added to a newlyestablished database CULIBEL. This database will be integrated into the Belgian Biodiversity Platform and will be kept updated by RBINS. Both RBINS and MODIRISK collections were used to compare recent and old data distributions (UTM 10x10km squares). A trend criterion was made of well surveyed grid cells and a decline of diversity near larger cities could be observed. An increase of distribution area was observed for several potential mosquito vectors having the capacity to use artificial containers as breeding sites. For 23 species there is a relative change in distribution area in 56 (10x10km) grid cells.A molecular archive was constructed of all collected species based on the DNA barcoding region at the ITMA. Moreover, a larval molecular identification assay was developed to rapidly detect and identify possible invasive species.\par \par \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Quality control description: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 All these and previous Belgian records were added to a the CULIBEL database. All voucher specimens from the available collections were re-identified at the species level using Schaffner et al., 2001. \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Datasets\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Dataset description\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Object name: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Darwin Core Archive MODIRISK:RBINS Diptera: Culidae Collection\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Character encoding: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 UTF-8\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Format name: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Darwin Core Archive format\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Format version: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 1.0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Distribution: \b0\f0{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK http://ipt.biodiversity.be/archive.do?r=modirisk-rbins-culidae-collection}{\fldrslt \pard\plain\f3\fs24\ul\cf3 http://ipt.biodiversity.be/archive.do?r=modirisk-rbins-culidae-collection\ul0 }}\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Publication date of data: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 2017-02-20\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Language: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 English\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Licences of use: \b0\f0{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/legalcode}{\fldrslt \pard\plain\f3\fs24\ul\cf3 Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC-BY-NC) 4.0 License\ul0 }}\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Metadata language: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 English\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Date of metadata creation: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 2017-02-15\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Hierarchy level: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Dataset\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 References\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 De Koninck at al, 2014, Changes in Species Richness and Spatial Distribution of Mosquitoes (Diptera: Culicidae) Inferred From Museum Specimen Records and a Recent Inventory: A Case Study From Belgium Suggests Recent Expanded Distribution of Arbovirus and Malaria Vectors, J Med Entomol (2013) 50 (2): 237-243.\f3\fs24\cf0  \f3\fs24\cf0 https://doi.org/10.1603/ME12134\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par}