{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times Bold;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f3\froman\fcharset0 Times;}{\f4\froman\fcharset0 Times Roman;}}{\colortbl\red0\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;}{\stylesheet {\style\s0 \ql\fi0\li0\ri0\f2\fs24\cf0 Normal;}{\style\s3 \ql\fi0\li0\ri0\f2\fs26\b\cf0 heading 3;}{\style\s2 \ql\fi0\li0\ri0\f2\fs28\b\i\cf0 heading 2;}{\style\s1 \ql\fi0\li0\ri0\f2\fs32\b\cf0 heading 1;}}{\*\listtable}{\*\listoverridetable}{\*\generator iText 2.1.7 by 1T3XT}{\info{\author Dimitri dimitri.brosens@inbo.be}{\creationdate \yr2017\mo02\dy22\hr10\min53\sec06}{\title MODIRISK:Monitoring of Mosquito Vectors, Longitudinal study}{\keywords Samplingevent, Occurrence, Culicidae, vector disease, mosquito, malaria, Eco-climatic changes, Culicidae, taxonomy, spatial distribution models, population genetics, ecology of invasive species}}\paperw11907\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\margt1440\margb1440\pgwsxn11907\pghsxn16840\marglsxn1440\margrsxn1440\margtsxn1440\margbsxn1440\pard\plain\s0\qc\fi0\li0\ri0\plain\f3\fs28\b\cf0 MODIRISK:Monitoring of Mosquito Vectors, Longitudinal study\b0\par\f0 \par \pard\plain\s0\qc\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 Wouter \f3\fs24\cf0 Dekoninck\f3\fs24\cf0\super 1\nosupersub\f3\fs24\cf0 , \f3\fs24\cf0 Veerle \f3\fs24\cf0 Versteirt\f3\fs24\cf0\super 2\nosupersub\f3\fs24\cf0 , \f3\fs24\cf0 Wim \f3\fs24\cf0 Van Bortel\f3\fs24\cf0\super 3\nosupersub\f3\fs24\cf0 , \f3\fs24\cf0 Dimitri \f3\fs24\cf0 dimitri.brosens@inbo.be\f3\fs24\cf0\super 4\nosupersub\par\f0 \par \pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 1 \f3\fs24\cf0 RBINS, \f3\fs24\cf0 Brussels\f3\fs24\cf0 ; \f3\fs24\cf0 2 \f3\fs24\cf0 Avia-GIS, \f3\fs24\cf0 , Belgium\f3\fs24\cf0 ; \f3\fs24\cf0 3 \f3\fs24\cf0 ECDC, \f3\fs24\cf0 Stockholm\f3\fs24\cf0 , Sweden\f3\fs24\cf0 ; \f3\fs24\cf0 4 \f3\fs24\cf0 Belgian Biodiversity Platform, \f3\fs24\cf0 Brussels\par\f0 \par \pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Corresponding author(s): \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Wouter \f3\fs24\cf0 Dekoninck\f3\fs24\cf0  (wdekoninck@naturalsciences.be)\f3\fs24\cf0 Veerle \f3\fs24\cf0 Versteirt\f3\fs24\cf0 Wim \f3\fs24\cf0 Van Bortel\f3\fs24\cf0 , \f3\fs24\cf0 Dimitri \f3\fs24\cf0 dimitri.brosens@inbo.be\f3\fs24\cf0  (dimitri.brosens@inbo.be)\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 Received \f3\fs24\cf2 \{date\}\f3\fs24\cf0 ; Revised \f3\fs24\cf2 \{date\}\f3\fs24\cf0 ; Accepted \f3\fs24\cf2 \{date\}\f3\fs24\cf0 ; Published \f3\fs24\cf2 \{date\}\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Citation: \b0\f3\fs24\cf2 Combination of authors, year of data paper publication (in parentheses), Title, Journal Name, Volume, Issue number (in parentheses), and doi of the data paper.\f3\fs24\cf2 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Resource Citation\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Dekoninck W, Versteirt V, Van Bortel W (2017): MODIRISK:Monitoring of Mosquito Vectors, Longitudinal study. v1.5. Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences. Dataset/Samplingevent. http://ipt.biodiversity.be/resource?r=modirisk-longitudinal-culicidae-study&v=1.5\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Abstract\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Knowledge of the taxonomic and functional biodiversity of both endemic and invading vector mosquito species as well as the factors driving change, is missing in Belgium. Acquiring this knowledge is an essential step towards understanding current risk and preparing for future treads. Therefore the objectives of the project MODIRISK (Mosquito vectors of disease: spatial biodiversity, drivers of change, and risk) were (1) to inventory endemic and invading mosquito species in Belgium considering environmental and taxonomic elements of biodiversity (http://www.gbif.org/dataset/6679952f-649b-4888-bd97-00daca4b8cc1) + (Collection), (2) to assess the population dynamics of endemic and invasive mosquito species and their interrelationship (This dataset) (3) to model mosquito biodiversity distribution at a one km resolution in the Benelux, and (4) to disseminate project outputs to the scientific community, end users and the general public.\par \par During the first phase (years 2007-2008), the project focused on the inventory activities; setting\u8211?up laboratory experiments for studying life history traits of Culex pipiens in relation to temperature and the first selection of models based on the field results. Whilst during the second phase of the project (years 2009-2010) the focus was on the spatial model building and validation, on the longitudinal study (this dataset) and dynamics of selected indigenous and exotic species that were found during the inventory of the first phase and on more population genetic driven research\par \par The longitudinal studies (2nd phase of the project) were conducted on selected indigenous and exotic species found during the first phase of the project. In total 33682 adult mosquitoes were collected at the four sites with the twelve traps.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Keywords: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Samplingevent, Occurrence, Culicidae, vector disease, mosquito, malaria, Eco-climatic changes, Culicidae, taxonomy, spatial distribution models, population genetics, ecology of invasive species\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Project details\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Project title: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Mosquito vectors of disease: spatial biodiversity, drivers of change, and risk\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Personnel: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Wouter Dekoninck\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Funding: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Belspo, Science for Sustainable Development- Project SD/BD/04D (http://www.belspo.be/belspo/ssd/science/pr_biodiversity_en.stm)\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Study area descriptions/descriptor: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Project fiche: http://www.belspo.be/belspo/ssd/science/projects/MODIRISK_en.pdf\par Project report:http://www.belspo.be/belspo/ssd/science/Reports/FinalReport_MODIRISK%20ML.pdf\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Design description: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 During the second phase of the project, longitudinal studies were conducted on selected indigenous and exotic species found during the first phase of the project. \par \par During the second phase of the project, longitudinal studies were conducted on selected indigenous and exotic species found during the first phase of the project. RBINS followed a severe nuisance problem of Anopheles plumbeus in Torhout. A laboratory colony of Culex pipiens was set-up at Universit\u233? Catholique de Louvain (UCL) to the study the impact of temperature on life history traits of the most wide spread mosquito species from Belgium.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Taxonomic coverage\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 General taxonomic coverage description: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Morphological identification of the Culicidae was done mainly using the electronic identification key of Schaffner et al. (2001) and the paper key of Becker et al. (2003). Data were stored into the web based data base as described above.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Taxonomic ranks\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Class: \f3\fs24\cf0 Insecta\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Order: \f3\fs24\cf0 Diptera\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Family: \f3\fs24\cf0 Culicidae\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Spatial coverage\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 General spatial coverage: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Belgium\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Coordinates: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 49\u176?18'39.6''N\f3\fs24\cf0  and \f3\fs24\cf0 51\u176?32'60''N\f3\fs24\cf0  Latitude; \f3\fs24\cf0 2\u176?22'22.8''E\f3\fs24\cf0  and \f3\fs24\cf0 6\u176?36'50.4''E\f3\fs24\cf0  Longitude \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Temporal coverage: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 July 28, 2009\f3\fs24\cf0  - \f3\fs24\cf0 November 20, 2009\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Temporal coverage: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 April 28, 2010\f3\fs24\cf0  - \f3\fs24\cf0 June 30, 2010\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Natural collections description\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Parent collection identifier: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 RBINS-Entomology Collection\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Collection name: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 RBINS-Entomology Collection\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Methods\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Method step description: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 1. Fieldwork\par 2. Validation\par 3. Analyse\par 4. Publication\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Study extent description: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Longitudinal studies were conducted in 3 selected sites across Belgium in the late summer of 2009 and the spring of 2010. The aim was to assess whether mosquito presence and abundance in the selected sites were correlated to those found in The Netherlands. It was assumed, though, that as the typical meadow landscapes as found in much of the North West of The Netherlands are not present in Belgium, differences in mosquito species composition and/or abundance might occur.\par \par Study site Maasmechelen (MA)\par \par The area surveyed was an old sand quarry near the national park Hoge Kempen and the industrial park of Maasmechelen, which harbours several recycling companies. One site was the initial reference site, a small mixed forest fragment with birch, oak and pine next to the industrial zone (MA1). The other subsite (MA2) was situated in the opposite of the road, in a narrow strip of mixed forest adjacent to a large nature reserve (heath). Land cover consists largely of mixed small forest, moorland, sand quarry and a large industrial zone.\par \par Study site Natoye (NT)\par The population of Aedes japonicus at Natoye was surveyed by UCL. \par Two Belgian second-hand tire companies located in the village of Natoye (Namur) were surveyed. Sites were named Natoye1 (50.3389587\u176? N, 5.044879\u176? E) and Natoye2 (50.33588\u176? N, 5.0714698\u176? E). The companies import mainly tires for trucks and heavy vehicles originating from various countries (only from Europe). Tires are stacked outside and many are exposed to rainfall and contain water and organic material like decomposing leaves. Landcover consists largely of deciduous forests, gardens, cultivated fields around Natoye1 and gardens, cultivated field and meadows around Natoye 2.\par \par Study Site Ruiselede (RL) & Study Site Torhout (TH)\par We sampled mosquitoes at two different localities in Western Flanders in the same ecoclimatic region, during one complete active season from May until October:\par - an urban-rural landscape was sampled: 2 sites at Torhout near Groenhove forest complex (TH01 and TH02) (Figure 24)\par - a natural landscape was sampled: 2 sites at Ruiselede, Vorte Bossen (RL01 and RL02)\par \par \par The sites were sampled two consecutive days (12:00 am-12:00 am) during 13 visits every two weeks from 20th of April 2009 until 5th of October 2009 with three types of traps (see 3.2).\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Sampling description: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Mosquitoes were sampled with CO2 traps used throughout the Modirisk project. Each site was sampled for one week continuously, once between August and October 2009, and once again between April and June 2010. In this way, spring and fall populations of mosquitoes were expected to be found. Samples taken to Wageningen for taxonomic identification using the key provided by Schaffner (Schaffner 1993). Members of the An. maculipennis complex were further identified to species using a PCR of the ITS2 region (Marinucci et al. 1999).\par \par Each site or area was sampled thoroughly, with preferably each site/area consisting of different subsites. Each of this subsite was then again sampled with a minimum of 6 traps (3 types, 2 of each type). The traps chosen are: the Mosquito Magnet Liberty Plus (MMLP), the BG Sentinel and Gravid trap (CDC, J. Hocke model). MMLP were used because of the fact that these traps were used during the inventory whilst BG Sentinels are often used to attract Aedes species and Gravid traps for Culex species. The sites were sampled fortnightly during 14 visits every two weeks from the 20th of April 2009 until the 12th of October 2009.\par \par Study Sites 1 Maasmechelen\par \par The area surveyed was an old sand quarry near the national park Hoge Kempen and the industrial park of Maasmechelen, which harbours several recycling companies. One site was the initial reference site, a small mixed forest fragment with birch, oak and pine next to the industrial zone (MA1). The other subsite (MA2) was situated in the opposite of the road, in a narrow strip of mixed forest adjacent to a large nature reserve (heath). Land cover consists largely of mixed small forest, moorland, sand quarry and a large industrial zone.\par \par Study site 2\par Two Belgian second-hand tire companies located in the village of Natoye (Namur) were surveyed. Sites were named Natoye1 (50.3389587\u176? N, 5.044879\u176? E) and Natoye2 (50.33588\u176? N, 5.0714698\u176? E). The companies import mainly tires for trucks and heavy vehicles originating from various countries (only from Europe). Tires are stacked outside and many are exposed to rainfall and contain water and organic material like decomposing leaves. Landcover consists largely of deciduous forests, gardens, cultivated fields around Natoye1 and gardens, cultivated field and meadows around Natoye 2.\par \par \par Study site 3 & 4\par \par We sampled mosquitoes at two different localities in Western Flanders in the same ecoclimatic region, during one complete active season from May until October:\par - an urban-rural landscape was sampled: 2 sites at Torhout near Groenhove forest complex (TH01 and TH02) (Figure 24)\par - a natural landscape was sampled: 2 sites at Ruiselede, Vorte Bossen (RL01 and RL02)\par \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Quality control description: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Samples taken to Wageningen for taxonomic identification using the key provided by Schaffner (Schaffner 1993). Members of the An. maculipennis complex were further identified to species using a PCR of the ITS2 region (Marinucci et al. 1999).\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Datasets\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Dataset description\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Object name: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Darwin Core Archive MODIRISK:Monitoring of Mosquito Vectors, Longitudinal study\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Character encoding: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 UTF-8\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Format name: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Darwin Core Archive format\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Format version: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 1.0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Distribution: \b0\f0{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK http://ipt.biodiversity.be/archive.do?r=modirisk-longitudinal-culicidae-study}{\fldrslt \pard\plain\f3\fs24\ul\cf3 http://ipt.biodiversity.be/archive.do?r=modirisk-longitudinal-culicidae-study\ul0 }}\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Publication date of data: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 2017-02-22\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Language: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 English\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Licences of use: \b0\f0{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/legalcode}{\fldrslt \pard\plain\f3\fs24\ul\cf3 Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC-BY-NC) 4.0 License\ul0 }}\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Metadata language: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 English\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Date of metadata creation: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 2017-02-17\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Hierarchy level: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Dataset\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 References\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Dekoninck W et al (2017): Changes in Species Richness and Spatial Distribution of Mosquitoes (Diptera: Culicidae) Inferred From Museum Specimen Records and a Recent Inventory: A Case Study From Belgium Suggests Recent Expanded Distribution of Arbovirus and Malaria Vectors\f3\fs24\cf0  \f3\fs24\cf0 DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1603/ME12134\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par}