{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times Bold;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f3\froman\fcharset0 Times;}{\f4\froman\fcharset0 Times Roman;}}{\colortbl\red0\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;}{\stylesheet {\style\s0 \ql\fi0\li0\ri0\f2\fs24\cf0 Normal;}{\style\s3 \ql\fi0\li0\ri0\f2\fs26\b\cf0 heading 3;}{\style\s2 \ql\fi0\li0\ri0\f2\fs28\b\i\cf0 heading 2;}{\style\s1 \ql\fi0\li0\ri0\f2\fs32\b\cf0 heading 1;}}{\*\listtable}{\*\listoverridetable}{\*\generator iText 2.1.7 by 1T3XT}{\info{\author Dimitri dimitri.brosens@inbo.be}{\creationdate \yr2017\mo02\dy17\hr14\min50\sec59}{\title MODIRISK:Monitoring of Mosquito Vectors, Longitudinal study}{\keywords Samplingevent}}\paperw11907\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\margt1440\margb1440\pgwsxn11907\pghsxn16840\marglsxn1440\margrsxn1440\margtsxn1440\margbsxn1440\pard\plain\s0\qc\fi0\li0\ri0\plain\f3\fs28\b\cf0 MODIRISK:Monitoring of Mosquito Vectors, Longitudinal study\b0\par\f0 \par \pard\plain\s0\qc\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 Wouter \f3\fs24\cf0 Dekoninck\f3\fs24\cf0\super 1\nosupersub\f3\fs24\cf0 , \f3\fs24\cf0 Dimitri \f3\fs24\cf0 dimitri.brosens@inbo.be\f3\fs24\cf0\super 2\nosupersub\f3\fs24\cf0 , \f3\fs24\cf0 Dimitri \f3\fs24\cf0 dimitri.brosens@inbo.be\f3\fs24\cf0\super 3\nosupersub\par\f0 \par \pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 1 \f3\fs24\cf0 RBINS, \f3\fs24\cf0 Brussels\f3\fs24\cf0 , Belgium\f3\fs24\cf0 ; \f3\fs24\cf0 2 \f3\fs24\cf0 , Belgium\f3\fs24\cf0 ; \f3\fs24\cf0 3 \par\f0 \par \pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Corresponding author(s): \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Wouter \f3\fs24\cf0 Dekoninck\f3\fs24\cf0 , \f3\fs24\cf0 Dimitri \f3\fs24\cf0 dimitri.brosens@inbo.be\f3\fs24\cf0  (dimitri.brosens@inbo.be)\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 Received \f3\fs24\cf2 \{date\}\f3\fs24\cf0 ; Revised \f3\fs24\cf2 \{date\}\f3\fs24\cf0 ; Accepted \f3\fs24\cf2 \{date\}\f3\fs24\cf0 ; Published \f3\fs24\cf2 \{date\}\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Citation: \b0\f3\fs24\cf2 Combination of authors, year of data paper publication (in parentheses), Title, Journal Name, Volume, Issue number (in parentheses), and doi of the data paper.\f3\fs24\cf2 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Abstract\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Knowledge of the taxonomic and functional biodiversity of both endemic and invading vector mosquito species as well as the factors driving change, is missing in Belgium. Acquiring this knowledge is an essential step towards understanding current risk and preparing for future treads. Therefore the objectives of the project MODIRISK (Mosquito vectors of disease: spatial biodiversity, drivers of change, and risk) were (1) to inventory endemic and invading mosquito species in Belgium considering environmental and taxonomic elements of biodiversity, (2) to assess the population dynamics of endemic and invasive mosquito species and their interrelationship (3) to model mosquito biodiversity distribution at a one km resolution in the Benelux, and (4) to disseminate project outputs to the scientific community, end users and the general public. During the first phase (years 2007-2008), the project focused on the inventory activities; setting\u8211?up laboratory experiments for studying life history traits of Culex pipiens in relation to temperature and the first selection of models based on the field results. Whilst during the second phase of the project (years 2009-2010) the focus was on the spatial model building and validation, on the longitudinal study and dynamics of selected indigenous and exotic species that were found during the inventory of the first phase and on more population genetic driven research.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Keywords: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Samplingevent\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Taxonomic coverage\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 General taxonomic coverage description: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Culicidae\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Taxonomic ranks\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Order: \f3\fs24\cf0 Diptera\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Family: \f3\fs24\cf0 Culicidae\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Spatial coverage\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 General spatial coverage: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Belgium\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Coordinates: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 49\u176?16'4.1''N\f3\fs24\cf0  and \f3\fs24\cf0 51\u176?50'8.8''N\f3\fs24\cf0  Latitude; \f3\fs24\cf0 2\u176?11'50.16''E\f3\fs24\cf0  and \f3\fs24\cf0 7\u176?17'41.72''E\f3\fs24\cf0  Longitude \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Temporal coverage: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 July 28, 2009\f3\fs24\cf0  - \f3\fs24\cf0 November 20, 2009\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Temporal coverage: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 April 28, 2010\f3\fs24\cf0  - \f3\fs24\cf0 June 30, 2010\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Methods\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Method step description: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 XXXXX\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Study extent description: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Longitudinal studies were conducted in 55 selected sites across The Netherlands in the late summer of 2009 and the spring of 2010. The aim was to assess whether mosquito presence and abundance in the selected sites were correlated to those found in Belgium. It was assumed, though, that as the typical meadow landscapes as found in much of the North West of The Netherlands are not present in Belgium, differences in mosquito species composition and/or abundance might occur.\par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Sampling description: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Mosquitoes were sampled with CO2 traps used throughout the Modirisk project. Each site was sampled for one week continuously, once between August and October 2009, and once again between April and June 2010. In this way, spring and fall populations of mosquitoes were expected to be found. Samples taken to Wageningen for taxonomic identification using the key provided by Schaffner (Schaffner 1993). Members of the An. maculipennis complex were further identified to species using a PCR of the ITS2 region (Marinucci et al. 1999).\par \par Each site or area was sampled thoroughly, with preferably each site/area consisting of\par different subsites. Each of this subsite was then again sampled with a minimum of 6 traps (3\par types, 2 of each type). The traps chosen are: the Mosquito Magnet Liberty Plus (MMLP), the\par BG Sentinel and Gravid trap (CDC, J. Hocke model). MMLP were used because of the fact\par that these traps were used during the inventory whilst BG Sentinels are often used to attract\par Aedes species and Gravid traps for Culex species. The sites were sampled fortnightly during 14 visits every two weeks from the 20th of April 2009 until the 12th of October 2009.\par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Quality control description: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Samples taken to Wageningen for taxonomic identification using the key provided by Schaffner (Schaffner 1993). Members of the An. maculipennis complex were further identified to species using a PCR of the ITS2 region (Marinucci et al. 1999).\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Metadata language: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 English\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Date of metadata creation: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 2017-02-16\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Hierarchy level: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Dataset\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par}