{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times Bold;}{\f2\froman\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f3\froman\fcharset0 Times;}{\f4\froman\fcharset0 Times Roman;}}{\colortbl\red0\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;}{\stylesheet {\style\s1 \ql\fi0\li0\ri0\f2\fs32\b\cf0 heading 1;}{\style\s2 \ql\fi0\li0\ri0\f2\fs28\b\i\cf0 heading 2;}{\style\s3 \ql\fi0\li0\ri0\f2\fs26\b\cf0 heading 3;}{\style\s0 \ql\fi0\li0\ri0\f2\fs24\cf0 Normal;}}{\*\listtable}{\*\listoverridetable}{\*\generator iText 2.1.7 by 1T3XT}{\info{\author Nicolas Noe}{\creationdate \yr2017\mo06\dy08\hr13\min50\sec27}{\title MODIRISK: Monitoring of Mosquito Vectors of Disease (inventory)}{\keywords Occurrence, Observation, mosquito, Cullicidae, vector, desease, monitoring, surveillance}}\paperw11907\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\margt1440\margb1440\pgwsxn11907\pghsxn16840\marglsxn1440\margrsxn1440\margtsxn1440\margbsxn1440\pard\plain\s0\qc\fi0\li0\ri0\plain\f3\fs28\b\cf0 MODIRISK: Monitoring of Mosquito Vectors of Disease (inventory)\b0\par\f0 \par \pard\plain\s0\qc\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 Veerle \f3\fs24\cf0 Versteirt\f3\fs24\cf0\super 1\nosupersub\f3\fs24\cf0 , \f3\fs24\cf0 Wouter \f3\fs24\cf0 Dekoninck\f3\fs24\cf0\super 2\nosupersub\f3\fs24\cf0 , \f3\fs24\cf0 Wim \f3\fs24\cf0 Van Bortel\f3\fs24\cf0\super 3\nosupersub\f3\fs24\cf0 , \f3\fs24\cf0 Dimitri \f3\fs24\cf0 Brosens\f3\fs24\cf0\super 4\nosupersub\f3\fs24\cf0 , \f3\fs24\cf0 Wouter \f3\fs24\cf0 Dekoninck\f3\fs24\cf0\super 5\nosupersub\f3\fs24\cf0 , \f3\fs24\cf0 Wim \f3\fs24\cf0 Van Bortel\f3\fs24\cf0\super 6\nosupersub\f3\fs24\cf0 , \f3\fs24\cf0 Thierry \f3\fs24\cf0 Hance\f3\fs24\cf0\super 7\nosupersub\par\f0 \par \pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 1 \f3\fs24\cf0 Avia-GIS, \f3\fs24\cf0 Rischotlei 33, \f3\fs24\cf0 2980, \f3\fs24\cf0 Zoersel\f3\fs24\cf0 ; \f3\fs24\cf0 2 \f3\fs24\cf0 RBINS, \f3\fs24\cf0 Brussels\f3\fs24\cf0 ; \f3\fs24\cf0 3 \f3\fs24\cf0 ITG, \f3\fs24\cf0 Antwerp\f3\fs24\cf0 , Belgium\f3\fs24\cf0 ; \f3\fs24\cf0 4 \f3\fs24\cf0 Belgian Biodiversity Platform, \f3\fs24\cf0 Kliniekstraat 25, \f3\fs24\cf0 9050, \f3\fs24\cf0 Brussels\f3\fs24\cf0 , Belgium\f3\fs24\cf0 ; \f3\fs24\cf0 5 \f3\fs24\cf0 RBINS, \f3\fs24\cf0 Vautierstraat 29, \f3\fs24\cf0 1000, \f3\fs24\cf0 Brussels\f3\fs24\cf0 , Belgium\f3\fs24\cf0 ; \f3\fs24\cf0 6 \f3\fs24\cf0 ITG, \f3\fs24\cf0 Stockholm\f3\fs24\cf0 , Belgium\f3\fs24\cf0 ; \f3\fs24\cf0 7 \f3\fs24\cf0 UCL, \f3\fs24\cf0 , Belgium\par\f0 \par \pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Corresponding author(s): \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Veerle \f3\fs24\cf0 Versteirt\f3\fs24\cf0  (vversteirt@avia-gis.com)\f3\fs24\cf0 Wouter \f3\fs24\cf0 Dekoninck\f3\fs24\cf0 Wim \f3\fs24\cf0 Van Bortel\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\cf0 Received \f3\fs24\cf2 \{date\}\f3\fs24\cf0 ; Revised \f3\fs24\cf2 \{date\}\f3\fs24\cf0 ; Accepted \f3\fs24\cf2 \{date\}\f3\fs24\cf0 ; Published \f3\fs24\cf2 \{date\}\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Citation: \b0\f3\fs24\cf2 Combination of authors, year of data paper publication (in parentheses), Title, Journal Name, Volume, Issue number (in parentheses), and doi of the data paper.\f3\fs24\cf2 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Resource Citation\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Versteirt V, Dekoninck W, Van Bortel W (2013): MODIRISK: Monitoring of Mosquito Vectors of Disease (inventory). v3.5. Belgium Biodiversity Platform. Dataset/Occurrence. http://ipt.biodiversity.be/manage/metadata-citations.do?r=modirisk\f3\fs24\cf0  \f3\fs24\cf0 http://ipt.biodiversity.be/manage/metadata-citations.do?r=modirisk\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Abstract\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 MODIRISK aims at studying biodiversity of mosquitoes and monitoring/predicting its changes, and hence actively prepares to address issues on the impact of biodiversity change with particular reference to invasive species and the risk to introduce new pathogens. This is essential in the perspective of the ongoing global changes creating suitable conditions for the spread of invasive species and the (re)emergence of vector-borne diseases in Europe. The main strengths of the project in the context of sustainable development are the link between biodiversity and health-environment, and its contribution to the development of tools to better describe the spatial distribution of mosquito biodiversity. MODIRISK addresses key topics of the global initiative Diversitas, which was one of the main drivers of the 'Research programme Science for a Sustainable Development' (SSD). \par \par This dataset contains the monitoring data.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 The project was coordinated by the Institute of Tropical Medicine (http://www.itg.be/E) in Antwerp.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Keywords: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Occurrence, Observation, mosquito, Cullicidae, vector, desease, monitoring, surveillance\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 General description\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Purpose: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Abstract\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Additional information: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 This dataset is linked with 2 other mosquito related datasets. One datset used for longitudinal study and the historical dataset from RBINS.\par \par The database server uses Windows Server 2003 SBS R2 as operating system, and is running IIS with PHP for site development, MS SQL Server for database development and SQL Server Mobile Tools to allow remote access from a PDA. Three types of MODIRISK forms were prepared by the MODIRISK coordinator and adapted during a group session at Project SD/BD/04 - Mosquito vectors of disease: spatial biodiversity, drivers of change, and risk \u8220?MODIRISK\u8221?\par SSD-Science for a Sustainable Development - Biodiversity 19 ITM: (1) Field form, (2) Morphological identification form, (3) Mosquito storage form. Based on these, relevant tables (Figure 5) were developed by Avia-GIS, implemented in the database, and transferred to the web server.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Project details\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Project title: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 MODIRISK\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Personnel: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Veerle Versteirt\f3\fs24\cf0 , \f3\fs24\cf0 Wouter Dekoninck\f3\fs24\cf0 , \f3\fs24\cf0 Wim Van Bortel\f3\fs24\cf0 , \f3\fs24\cf0 Eva De Clercq\f3\fs24\cf0 , \f3\fs24\cf0 David Damiens\f3\fs24\cf0 , \f3\fs24\cf0 Audrey Ayrinhac\f3\fs24\cf0 , \f3\fs24\cf0 Frans Jacobs\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Funding: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 BELSPO\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Study area descriptions/descriptor: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 The area studies covers the entire Belgian Area.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Data published through \b0\f0{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK http://www.gbif.org}{\fldrslt \pard\plain\f3\fs24\ul\cf3 GBIF\ul0 }}\f3\fs24\cf0 : \f0{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK http://ipt.biodiversity.be/resource?r=modirisk-monitoring-2}{\fldrslt \pard\plain\f3\fs24\ul\cf3 http://ipt.biodiversity.be/resource?r=modirisk-monitoring-2\ul0 }}\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Taxonomic coverage\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 General taxonomic coverage description: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Diptera; Cullicidae;\par Reinert, 2000\par ! Taxonomical problem... Aedes (splitt.. biodiversity & health)\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Taxonomic ranks\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Kingdom: \f3\fs24\cf0 Animalia\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Order: \f3\fs24\cf0 Diptera\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Family: \f3\fs24\cf0 Cullicidae\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Subfamily: \f3\fs24\cf0 Anophelinae\f3\fs24\cf0 , Cullicinae\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Spatial coverage\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 General spatial coverage: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Belgium\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Coordinates: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 49\u176?23'60''N\f3\fs24\cf0  and \f3\fs24\cf0 51\u176?32'24''N\f3\fs24\cf0  Latitude; \f3\fs24\cf0 2\u176?23'24''E\f3\fs24\cf0  and \f3\fs24\cf0 6\u176?34'12''E\f3\fs24\cf0  Longitude \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Temporal coverage: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 2007\f3\fs24\cf0  - \f3\fs24\cf0 2011\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Methods\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Method step description: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Sample protocol: \par Sample, identification\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Study extent description: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Corine land cover: arban, nature and agriculture were sampled from 2007 to 2011.\par The cross-sectional field survey was conducted in 2007 and 2008 by use of a network of CO2-baited Mosquito Magnet Liberty Plus traps throughout Belgium in three key habitats. These habitats (urban, agriculture and nature) were selected based on the Corine database. Twenty seven traps operated simultaneously (nine per team, three teams leaded by three partner institutes). Each trap operated seven days on one study site after which it was placed on the next study site. During the inventory 936 randomly selected sites were selected of which 97% were sampled. Additionally sites in import risk areas were sampled to evaluate the presence of exotic mosquito species in Belgium.\par At the Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences (RBINS) about 1400 mosquito-specimens from the Belgian collection of the Entomology Department were screened and if needed, added to the collection. These data, "collection data" are available through http://ipt.biodiversity.be/resource.do?r=modirisk-collection-data\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Sampling description: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 All samples were taken with the Mosquito magnet liberty PLUS. A CO2 baited trap.\par \par During the field work, twenty seven traps operated simultaneously (9 by team). Each trap operated seven days on one study site after which it was placed on the next study site. During the first phase of the project (inventory), field work was done on Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday: each day three traps were emptied and replaced. The remaining days were used for the organisation of the field work and the morphological identification of the collected mosquitoes. During the second phase of the project (validation), each field team was free to organise the field work as suited\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Quality control description: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 The identifications where made by 3 independent specialists. Yearly a quality control of the samples were done by a independent specialist. (double check). Also a DNA barcoding was performed to double check on the specimens.\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Datasets\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Dataset description\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Object name: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Darwin Core Archive MODIRISK: Monitoring of Mosquito Vectors of Disease (inventory)\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Character encoding: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 UTF-8\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Format name: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Darwin Core Archive format\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Format version: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 1.0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Distribution: \b0\f0{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK http://ipt.biodiversity.be/archive.do?r=modirisk-monitoring-2}{\fldrslt \pard\plain\f3\fs24\ul\cf3 http://ipt.biodiversity.be/archive.do?r=modirisk-monitoring-2\ul0 }}\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Publication date of data: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 2017-06-08\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Language: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 English\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Licences of use: \b0\f0{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode}{\fldrslt \pard\plain\f3\fs24\ul\cf3 Creative Commons Attribution (CC-BY) 4.0 License\ul0 }}\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 Metadata language: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 English\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Date of metadata creation: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 2013-11-28\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\b\cf0 Hierarchy level: \b0\f3\fs24\cf0 Dataset\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par\pard\plain\s0\qj\fi0\li0\ri0\sl320\plain\f3\fs24\b\cf0 References\b0\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Changes in Species Richness and Spatial Distribution of Mosquitoes (Diptera: Culicidae) Inferred From Museum Specimen Records and a Recent Inventory: A Case Study From Belgium Suggests Recent Expanded Distribution of Arbovirus and Malaria Vectors\par W. Dekoninck\par Journal of Medical Entomology(2013),50(2):237\f3\fs24\cf0  \f3\fs24\cf0 http://dx.doi.org/10.1603/ME12134\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 V. Versteirt, S. Boyer, D. Damiens, E.M. De Clercq, W. Dekoninck, E. Ducheyne, P. Grootaert, C. Garros, T. Hance,\par G. Hendrickx, M. Coosemans and W. Van Bortel Nationwide inventory of mosquito biodiversity (Diptera: Culicidae) in\par Belgium, Europe. Bulletin of Entomological Research, Available on CJO 2012\f3\fs24\cf0  \f3\fs24\cf0 doi:10.1017/S0007485312000521\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \f3\fs24\cf0 Versteirt V., De Clercq E., Dekoninck W., Damiens D., Ayrinhac A., Jacobs F. & Van Bortel W. "Mosquito vectors of disease: spatial biodiversity, drivers of change, and risk". Final Report. Brussels : Belgian Science Policy 2009 \u8211?152 p. (Research Programme Science for a Sustainable Development)\f3\fs24\cf0 \par \par}