# DNA-based species identification pipeline: step-by-step laboratory procedure

## Overview:
 
A reliable species identification irrespective of the life stage is a prerequisite for species monitoring. This pipeline was designed in the framework of the MEMO project (Monitoring of Exotic MOsquito species in Belgium; 2017-2020) for the DNA-based species identification and morphological species validation of all native mosquito species occurring in Belgium (1–4), including some exotics of main concern (i.e. of health importance). We investigated and evaluated available molecular identification techniques for each mosquito species (native and invasive) recorded and encountered in Belgium. For each molecular marker, we evaluated its representativeness (i.e. number of reference sequences and geographical coverage) and its performance at providing a reliable identification. On the final designed pipeline, native species are indicated in black colour and exotic species in red colour. Of these exotic species, Aedes albopictus, Ae. japonicus, Ae. koreicus and Anopheles pharoensis were effectively encountered during the MEMO project. Aedes aegypti, Ae. atropalpus, Ae. triseriatus and Culex quinquefasciatus were included as they represent major disease vectors – and thus should continuously stay under surveillance, but they were not collected in Belgium during the project. 

### STEP 1: DNA extraction

DNA was extracted from legs or abdomens in the case of adult mosquitoes, stored dry in a -80 °C freezer. Larvae were preserved in 100 % ethanol and DNA was extracted from a piece of tissue taken between the 2nd and 7th abdominal segment. For both adults and larvae, the NucleoSpin® Tissue DNA extraction kit (Macherey-Nagel) was used following the manufacturer’s protocol, but with an elution volume of 70 µl (minimum digestion time: 3 hours; maximum digestion time: over-night). In the case of eggs, they were first cut in half under a binocular, then individually processed using the QIAamp DNA Micro kit (Qiagen) with an elution volume of 50 µl. Remaining parts of the specimens (-80 °C) and dried DNA extracts (room temperature) are stored at the Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences (Collection Identifier: IG34179).

### STEP 2: PCR with LCO1490/HCO2198 primers – COI

After DNA extraction, the universal primers LCO1490 (5'-GGTCAACAAATCATAAAGATATTGG-3') and HCO2198 (5'-TAAACTTCAGGGTGACCAAAAAATCA-3') (5) were used to amplify the mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit I (COI) barcode region (658 bp) (6). The PCR reaction was carried out in a final volume of 20 µl, with each reaction mixture containing 2 µl of DNA template, 2 µl of 10X buffer, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM dNTP, 0.4 µM of each primer, and 0.03 units/µl of PlatinumTM Taq DNA Polymerase (InvitrogenTM). The PCR cycling conditions were as follow: initial denaturation at 94 °C for 3 min, followed by five first cycles of denaturation at 94 °C for 30 sec, annealing at 45 °C for 30 sec and elongation at 72 °C for 60 sec, then by 35 cycles of denaturation at 94 °C for 30 sec, annealing at 51 °C for 30 sec and elongation at 72 °C for 60 sec, with a final elongation at 72 °C for 10 min. PCR products and negative controls were run on a 1.5 % agarose gel, using a UV transilluminator and the MidoriGreenTM Direct (NIPPON Genetics Europe) method. 

### STEP 3: PCR with C1N2181/C1J1718 primers – COI

Optional step: In case the first PCR with the universal primers (STEP 1) was unsuccessful, the C1N2191 (5’-CCCGGTAAAATTAAAATATAAACTTC-3’) and C1J1718 (5’-GGGGGGTTTGGAAATTGATTAGTGCC-3’) primer combination (7) was used to amplify a 472 bp fragment of the COI barcode region (8). PCR mixtures and cycling conditions are as described in STEP 1. 

### STEP 4: Sanger sequencing, compare against BOLD database, NJ-tree

Positive PCR amplicons were subsequently purified using the ExoSAP-ITTM protocol, following the manufacturer’s instructions, and sequenced in both directions on an ABI 3230xl capillary DNA sequencer using BigDye Terminator v3.1 chemistry (ThermoFisher Scientific). The quality of the sequencing output was checked with Geneious® Prime (Biomatters Ltd.), after which strands were trimmed, corrected, translated into amino acids and assembled using the same software. Consensus sequences were extracted and aligned using ClustalW in Geneious® Prime. The identification engine of BOLD was used ([http://www.boldsystems.org/index.php/IDS_OpenIdEngine](http://www.boldsystems.org/index.php/IDS_OpenIdEngine)), with species level barcode records option for species identification (similarity percentage). Neighbour-joining tree was constructed using sequences downloaded from BOLD and GenBank, and the COI sequences clustering and tree branch support were investigated. After achievement of this step, the identifications of the here after listed species are considered reliable (no further steps are required): Genus Aedes: Ae. aegypti, Ae. albopictus, Ae. atropalpus, Ae. communis, Ae. detritus, Ae. flavescens, Ae. geniculatus, Ae. japonicus, Ae. koreicus, Ae. punctor, Ae. rusticus, Ae. sticticus, Ae. triseriatus, Ae. vexans; Genus Anopheles: An. claviger, An. pharoensis, An. plumbeus; Genus Culex: Cx. hortensis, Cx. modestus, Cx. territans, Cx. torrentium; Genus Culiseta: Cs. annulate, Cs. fumipennis, Cs. longiareolata, Cs. morsitans, Cs. ochroptera; Genus Coquillettidia: Cq. richiardii. If, however, the analyses provided the following identification results, further steps are required: Anopheles maculipennis s.l. (i.e. An. messeae, An. daciae, An. maculipennis s.s., An. atroparvus) follow STEP 5 and 6; Culex pipiens s.l. (i.e. Cx. pipiens s.s. and Cx. quinquefasciatus) follow STEP 7 and 8 (*note: Culex torrentium species identification can be validated with a species-specific primer following the details in STEP 7, but it is not mandatory); for the following list of species, Aedes annulipes, Aedes cantans, Aedes caspius, Aedes dorsalis, Aedes cinereus, Aedes geminus, Culiseta subochrea, see STEP 9.

### STEP 5: PCR with 28SR/5.8SF primers - ITS2

When the first analyses based on COI resulted in Anopheles maculipennis s.l. (i.e. in Belgium, An. messeae, An. daciae, An. maculipennis s.s., An. atroparvus), the nuclear ITS2 gene fragment has to be amplified using the primers 5.8SF (5’-TGTGAACTGCAGGACACATG-3’) and 28SR (5’-ATGCTTAAATTTAGGGGGTA-3’) (3,9). The thermal cycling conditions for the amplification of ITS2 were adapted as follows: 3 min denaturation at 94 °C, 35 cycles at 94 °C for 30 s, 46 °C for 30 s and 72 °C for 45 s, followed by a final 7 min elongation at 72 °C. PCR reactions were carried out as described in (10). Positive PCR amplicons were subsequently purified using the ExoSAP-ITTM protocol, following the manufacturer’s instructions.

### STEP 6: RFLP analyses run on agarose gel, using HhaI and Bsh1236I restriction enzymes

The purified ITS2 PCR products were further processed with two restriction enzymes that produce species-diagnostic banding patterns for An. maculipennis s.l., viz. Hha I (CGC↓G) to distinguish between An. maculipennis s.s., An. atroparvus and An. daciae / An. messeae (11), and Bsh 1236I (CG↓CG) to differentiate An. daciae, An. messeae and An. atroparvus (12). Half of the purified ITS2 PCR product was digested using FastDigest Hha I (Thermo Fisher Scientific), the other half was digested using FastDigest Bsh 1236I (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For both reactions, the total reaction volume was 30 µl, comprising 17 µl nuclease-free water, 2 µl 10X FastDigest Green Buffer, 1 µl FastDigest enzyme and 10 µl of purified PCR product. Samples were incubated at 37 °C in a ThermoMixer for 7 min. Restriction fragments were size-separated by electrophoresis on a 3 % agarose gel (one hour at 80 V), together with the FastGene 50 bp DNA ladder (NIPPON Genetics Europe). Visualization was performed on a UV transilluminator using the MidoriGreenTM Direct (NIPPON Genetics Europe) staining method. Using Hha I, An. maculipennis s.s. (42 bp, 56 bp, 102 bp, 272 bp) and An. atroparvus (42 bp, 56 bp, 389 bp) can clearly be discriminated from An. daciae / An. messeae (42 bp, 56 bp, 111 bp, 135 bp, 141 bp). Using Bsh 1236I, An. daciae (42 bp, 52 bp, 59 bp, 332 bp), An. messeae (42 bp, 111 bp, 332 bp) and An. atroparvus (42 bp, 445 bp) have a unique banding pattern, but An. messeae is hardly distinguishable from An. maculipennis s.s. (42 bp, 102 bp, 328 bp) due to small fragment size differences i.e. 111 bp vs 102 bp and 332 bp vs 328 bp (3). The RFLP method represents a cost-efficient and rapid alternative for the routine identification of the four An. maculipennis s.l. species, provided that both restriction enzymes are used jointly. Note that it is also possible to sequence the ITS2 PCR product for species identification, however, to discriminate between An. daciae and An. messeae, aligned consensus sequences need to be visually checked for the presence of the five species-specific diagnostic sites as highlighted in (11).

### STEP 7: PCR with ACEquin/ACEpip and B1246s primers - ACE2 / fragment size analysis run on agarose gel

To distinguish between Cx. pipiens s.s., Cx. quinquefasciatus and eventually confirm the identification of Cx. torrentium, a fragment of the Acetylcholinesterase-2 locus (ACE2) was amplified in a 10 µl PCR reaction volume as described by (13). Using the forward primer B1246s (5’-TGGAGCTCCTCTTCACGG-3’), and the reverse primers ACEpip (5’-GGAAACAACGACGTATGTACT-3’), ACEquin (5’-CCTTCTTGAATGGCTGTGGCA-3’) and ACEtorr (5’-TGCCTGTGCTACCAGTGATGTT-3’) species-specific fragment sizes were produced, viz. 610 bp for Cx. pipiens s.s., 416 bp for Cx. torrentium, and 274 bp for Cx. quinquefasciatus (13). The thermal cycling conditions for the amplification of ACE2 were as follows: 3 min denaturation at 94 °C, 35 cycles at 94 °C for 30 s, 55 °C for 30 s and 72 °C for 60 s, followed by a final 5 min elongation at 72 °C. PCR products are checked on a 2.5 % agarose gel (45 min; 90 V).

### STEP 8: PCR with pipCQ11R/molCQ11R and CQ11F2 primers - CQ11 / fragment size analysis run on agarose gel

To identify the two Cx. pipiens s.s. biotypes and their hybrids, the CQ11 microsatellite locus was amplified using the forward primer CQ11F2 (5'-GATCCTAGCAAGCGAGAAC-3') and the reverse primers pipCQ11R (5'-CATGTTGAGCTTCGGTGAA-3') and molCQ11R (5'-CCCTCCAGTAAGGTATCAAC-3'), following (14). The thermal cycling conditions for the amplification of CQ11 were as follows: 3 min denaturation at 94 °C, 40 cycles at 94 °C for 30 s, 54 °C for 30 s and 72 °C for 40 s, followed by a final 5 min elongation at 72 °C. PCR products were checked on a 2.5 % agarose gel (45 min; 90V), with a band at 200 bp for Cx. p. biotype pipiens and at 250 bp for Cx. p. biotype molestus. Hybrids show both bands. 

### STEP 9: Further tests required

Except for seven species, all (native and invasive) recorded and encountered mosquito species in Belgium were considered reliably identifiable by DNA-based methods following the present pipeline steps. For six native species, however, identification was only possible to complex level using COI alone, viz. Aedes annulipes / Ae. cantans; Aedes caspius / Ae. dorsalis; Aedes cinereus / Ae. geminus. Alternative markers are currently investigated, tested on Belgian specimens.
For any further questions regarding this DNA-based identification pipeline, please contact BopCo: via [http://bopco.myspecies.info/](http://bopco.myspecies.info/) or [bopco@naturalsciences.be](bopco@naturalsciences.be).


### References

1. 	Boukraa S, Dekoninck W, Versteirt V, Schaffner F, Coosemans M, Haubruge E, et al. Updated checklist of the mosquitoes (Diptera : Culicidae) of Belgium. J Vector Ecol. 2015;40(2):398–407. 
2. 	De Wolf K, Vanderheyden A, Deblauwe I, Smitz N, Gombeer S, Vanslembrouck A, et al. First record of the West Nile virus bridge vector Culex modestus Ficalbi (Diptera: Culicidae) in Belgium, validated by DNA barcoding. Zootaxa. 2021;4920(1):131–9. 
3. 	Smitz N, De Wolf K, Gheysen A, Deblauwe I, Vanslembrouck A, Meganck K, et al. DNA identification of species of the Anopheles maculipennis complex and first record of An. daciae in Belgium. Med Vet Entomol [Internet]. 2021 Sep 1 [cited 2022 Mar 22];35(3):442–50. Available from: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33951205/
4. 	Deblauwe I, Ibáñez-Justicia A, De Wolf K, Smitz N, Schneider A, Stroo A, et al. First Detections of Culiseta longiareolata (Diptera: Culicidae) in Belgium and the Netherlands. J Med Entomol. 2021;58(6):2524–32. 
5. 	Folmer O, Black M, Hoeh W, Lutz R, Vrijenhoek R. DNA primers for amplification of mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit I from diverse metazoan invertebrates. Mol Mar Biol Biotechnol. 1994;3(5):294–9. 
6. 	Hebert P, Cywinska A, Ball S, DeWaard J. Biological identifications through DNA barcodes. Proc R Soc - Biol Sci. 2003;270:313–21. 
7. 	Simon C, Frati F, Beckenback A, Crespi B, Liu H, Flook P. Evolution, Weighting, and Phylogenetic Utility of Mitochondrial Gene Sequences and a Compilation of Conserved Polymerase Chain Reaction Primers. Entomol Soc Am. 1994;87(6):653–701. 
8. 	Folmer O, Black M, Hoeh W, Lutz R, Vrijenhoek R. DNA primers for amplification of mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit I from diverse metazoan invertebrates. Mol Mar Biol Biotechnol [Internet]. 1994;3(5):294–9. Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7881515
9. 	Collins FH, Paskewitz SM. A review of the use of ribosomal DNA (rDNA) to differentiate among cryptic Anopheles species. Insect Mol Biol. 1996;5(1):1–9. 
10. 	Ibáñez-Justicia A, Smitz N, den Hartog W, van de Vossenberg B, De Wolf K, Deblauwe I, et al. Detection of Exotic Mosquito Species (Diptera: Culicidae) at International Airports in Europe. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020;17(10):3450. 
11. 	Nicolescu G, Linton Y-M, Vladimirescu A, Howard TM, Harbach RE. Mosquitoes of the Anopheles maculipennis group (Diptera: Culicidae) in Romania, with the discovery and formal recognition of a new species based on molecular and morphological evidence. Bull Entomol Res. 2004;94(6):525–35. 
12. 	Danabalan R, Monaghan MT, Ponsonby DJ, Linton YM. Occurrence and host preferences of Anopheles maculipennis group mosquitoes in England and Wales. Med Vet Entomol. 2014;28:169–78. 
13. 	Smith JL, Fonseca DM. Rapid assays for identification of members of the Culex (Culex) pipiens complex, their hybrids, and other sibling species (Diptera: Culicidae). Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2004;70(4):339–45. 
14. 	Bahnck CM, Fonseca DM. Rapid assay to identify the two genetic forms of Culex (Culex) pipiens L . (Diptera : Culicidae) and hybrid populations. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2006;75(2):251–5. 
